This is the continuation of the code challenge we started in the previous video.
The goal of exercise three is to get the MLP activations for all of our target tokens, so that we can
set up a logistic regression classifier.
You will implement the actual classifier in the next exercise.
The goal here in exercise three is to create batches and push the tokens through the model to hook the
MLP activations.
So you want to create two batches of data, one for the negation words and one for the affirmation words.
You can check the sizes of the batches.
These are, however, many tokens you identified and then 101.
And the idea here is that the first 90 of these tokens are the 90 tokens before each target word.
And then we have the target token.
And then there are ten more target tokens after that.
And the reason why I set up, set it up this way is so that in every sequence here, the 91st token
of every sequence will be the target word.
And that is going to make things easier for grabbing the activations from those target tokens later
on when we start running analyses.
Once you have these batches, you can run forward passes through the model for each of the two batches,
you want to check the sizes of the activations matrix.
Here you see an example.
This one is 178 by 101 by 5120.
Of course, that corresponds to the number of sequences, the number of tokens, and the number of neurons
in each MLP Expansion layer.
Now, also remember that the way that I coded the hook, which might also be the way that you coded
the hook, the activations dictionary, that variable gets overwritten every time there's a forward
pass.
So you have two options here.
You can either recreate the hook so you can define the hook in a different way so that it doesn't overwrite,
and instead it just appends another set of matrices.
Or you can copy the activations into a different variable.
Between running the two forward passes for the two different batches.
Now in my opinion that was the easier solution.
So that's what I did.
Here you can see this variable is the activations for the affirmations word.
And I have a different variable for the negations word.
Again that is my solution.
You can do that if you also like that approach but you can also do it differently if you prefer.
Anyway, once you have these activations matrices, you will be ready to do some analyses and visualizations.
But that will come in the next exercise.
For now, you should pause the video and create those batches and push them through the model.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution.
Here I am initializing the two batch variables.
They are sequences by tokens.
Now this actually says number of tokens here, but that it will correspond to the number of sequences.
And the length of each sequence is the 90 tokens before the target token, the target token itself,
and then the ten tokens afterwards.
And because we are using these as integers, that we will input into the model that are used to select
each corresponding row in the embeddings matrix, you need to make sure that these are integers or torched
long.
So here for the negation sequences, I'm looping over the number of negation tokens.
And then I'm just grabbing one index out of here.
I didn't explain this variable in a lot of detail in the previous exercise.
So let me just show this to you really quickly.
So this is the index into the book token sequence where we have all of the negation terms.
That simple.
So here I'm grabbing each one of those in the loop.
And then I'm populating this batch for this row and all of the tokens to be the tokens from this target
token minus the preceding token context to the post seeding context.
So for the negation sequences and the affirmation sequences.
And there we have it.
Okay.
Very nice.
Now I am pushing the tokens through the model of course with torch.
Nograd.
We don't want to do any gradient related computations.
We also want to make sure the model is in eval mode.
So we switch off all of the regularizations and dropout and so on.
Okay.
Now this activations variable, that's what gets replaced.
It gets overwritten when I run this line of code.
So that's why I save a copy of the activations into this variable over here.
So if you're running this on the CPU, this code cell will take, I don't know, a minute, two minutes,
five minutes.
It shouldn't be too bad on the GPU.
It's several seconds.
And then here I'm just printing out the keys here.
So we confirm that we get the MLP activations for all of the layers in the model, and then just picking
one at random just to show the shape.
Of course, the shape is the same for every layer.
Now for the logistic regression.
The goal here is to test for negation word tuning in all of the neurons from one layer.
I picked layer 13.
You can pick any other layer.
It doesn't matter.
Actually.
In the next exercise you will expand your analysis to look for neurons in all of the layers.
So this exercise is really just about developing and inspecting the results for one layer for simplicity.
Now you can create the same two visualizations as we did in the previous videos.
And I recommend finding and copying that code and then modifying it as necessary.
This is a really interesting example neuron where the classification is really, really high.
So there are these are the probabilities coming from the logistic regression model for all of the affirmation
words over here, and the negation words up here.
By the way, this neuron that I'm showing here, this was the neuron that had the maximum positive beta
value.
You can actually see it here.
It's this one over here.
So that means to create this plot you just need to find the neuron that had the largest beta value and
then grab its data again and rerun the logistic regression to generate the predictions for each of the
target tokens.
Now for this exercise here.
Exercise four you can just focus on coding the analysis and generating these two plots.
We're going to do some additional visualizations including text heatmaps in the next exercise.
Okay.
So pause the video and enjoy working through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code for the logistic regression, we need a vector of category labels.
So a bunch of zeros and a bunch of ones.
And we're going to use that vector of category labels multiple times throughout the rest of this code
challenge.
So I'm creating it here.
Call it category labels.
And it is zeros for the number of affirmation tokens and ones for the number of negation tokens.
As I have discussed in I think it was the previous video, it doesn't really matter which order you
do it in, so you could have the negation tokens be zeros and the affirmation tokens be ones.
That doesn't change any of the statistics.
It doesn't change the significance.
The only thing it changes is the sign of the beta values, the sign of the of the model parameters.
So if it's a positive beta, that means more activation for negation tokens if it's a negative beta,
it means more activation for affirmation tokens.
Okay.
So run that.
And yeah, as I mentioned for this exercise we just want to focus on one layer just to keep things simple.
Okay.
Uh, this is uh, yeah.
It's just some confirmation to make sure that I was really getting the correct token.
So looking at token index from these batches, token index context pre, uh, that basically just,
you know, skips past all of the preceding, uh, contextual tokens.
And this just confirms that I'm getting the word not from the negations and the word uh, from the affirmations.
So that means when I use this variable context pre as an index into the activations, I can be confident
that I am getting the correct target tokens.
Okay, here I am gathering up all of the data and running the logistic model.
Okay, so I have a loop over all of the neurons.
All 5000 neurons.
Here is where I'm gathering up all of the data.
So you can see it's from I call this variable targets for targets and comps for comparison.
So this is the negations activations from this particular layer.
And we have all the batches this token index and this particular neuron index.
So that's where the negations and the affirmations.
This code you have seen before.
I'm running statsmodels logit for the logistic regression I input the dependent variable here which
is the category labels.
And then I have the data here which is the comparison and the targets.
So that would correspond to labels zero and one.
And this is kind of new here I think I had disp equals zero before.
This just suppresses the output of the function basically because we're running 5000 of these things.
So I don't need to just have this printed out multiple times.
This max iter basically increases the maximum number of iterations for this iterative nonlinear model
fitting approach to fit the data up to 3000 iterations.
The default, I believe is 30 or 40, something like that.
So in case the parameters can be estimated, but the model just needs a couple more iterations.
And that's what this is for.
And then I have this whole thing encased in a try except command statement.
And basically that's because sometimes the model fit just really doesn't work at all because the data
are just there's outliers or it's perfect separability.
And this can crash.
So if this crashes, then I just want to leave the matrices, the values as Nans.
And if it doesn't crash, which happens nearly all the time, it only crashes every once in a while.
So if it does crash, then the results will be Nan.
That's good.
We can ignore them later if it doesn't crash.
If everything goes well, then these nans get replaced with the p value here and the beta value over
here.
This is a single parameter model.
It just has a one parameter for the category label and then one parameter for the constant.
The constant or the intercept is the first variable in the model.
So that would be with index zero as I mentioned before.
So just a quick reminder.
We generally do not care about the constant or the intercept term.
All that does is tell us whether the average activation is different from zero.
So really what we want is the slope which is the second term, the second beta term.
Okay.
So I can run all that.
And then here this is all code you have seen.
So basically we see that there's a lot of statistically significant neurons here.
Now what does this mean.
This tells us that the model was statistically significant for all of these neurons.
All of these neurons up here.
Remember that we have a comparison between two categories.
So red or positive beta means that the neuron had more activation for negation tokens compared to affirmation
tokens.
And green indicates the opposite.
So there were more there were stronger activation, more positive activations for negation of affirmation
tokens compared to negation tokens.
And I'm not actually counting these, but it looks like it's roughly balanced.
So it kind of looks like there's approximately as many negation tuned neurons as there are affirmation
tuned neurons.
Now this is a direct comparison.
So what we do not know.
What we cannot say about these neurons is that they only care about negation or affirmation and nothing
else.
For all we know, these neurons respond a lot to like football and bottled water, or like any other
random categories of tokens.
The only thing we know for sure is that there is a significant difference in activation values across
the 400 tokens that we are using here for negation versus affirmation target tokens.
Okay.
And then here what I'm doing is just grabbing the the maximum beta.
So it's index 2022.
So it's this one up here.
This one had the largest beta value.
And that looks like this one over here.
Interestingly this is not the most significant one in terms of the smallest p value.
But it is the one with the largest beta coefficient.
And why is that the case.
Well you know, the p value is based on a number of factors, including the sample size and the variability
and so on.
So simply having a larger parameter does not necessarily mean that the p value will be smaller.
That is often the case.
This is a much deeper discussion into inferential statistics.
But uh, it often can be the case that larger uh magnitude effects have smaller p values, but it is
not trivially the case.
Okay.
Anyway, we are going to continue working with this one, uh, with this neuron later.
The last thing that I'm going to do is generate the predictions and calculate accuracy.
So now I've already extracted all of these activations here inside the for loop.
But at each iteration inside the for loop these variables get replaced.
They get overwritten.
So if I want to do a detailed analysis for one particular neuron, I need to go back to this for loop
basically to this code and rerun this.
But not for each individual neuron, but only the one that I'm specifically interested in.
And that is what I do here.
So here I get the targets, the comparison activations, and I rerun the logistic regression model exactly
as I did earlier in that for loop.
But this is just for this one neuron that shows the maximum response.
Okay.
And then I use results.
So result is the output of smart fit.
And then I get the predictions and remember that this is the.
Probabilities of each token being an affirmation token if the probability is close to zero, or a negation
token if the probability is close to one.
So I use 0.5 as the threshold.
And I say if those match the actual category label, then that is the accuracy.
So this would be the per token accuracy.
And then to get the overall accuracy you would average across all of these elements here.
Okay.
And then finally the visualization.
This is all code you have seen before in the previous video.
So that's it for this part of the code challenge I'm going to cut the video here.
I encourage you to get out of your chair, stretch your legs, have some coffee or whatever.
When you feel refreshed, come back to the next video where we will continue with this code challenge.
This is the continuation of the code challenge we started in the previous video.
Exercise five is not so difficult in terms of writing new code, so you can spend your time thinking
about what the results mean, how we set up the analysis, what might be other ways to implement this
analysis?
The goal here is simple.
Just find that best predicting neuron that you identified in the previous exercise and create a heat
map with its activations.
Now for this visualization I used a smaller context window just so we don't have to see all 90 tokens
preceding each target token.
So here in each line you see for example, not not not not not there's a lot of not nor here.
These are all the target tokens wouldn't uh and so on.
And as you know from other videos, I just arbitrarily set the color here to be 0.1 for all of these
tokens, so that you can experience the joy of discovering what the actual results look like when you
code this up yourself.
And as you are considering the results, I would like you to think about how we set up the analysis,
what the logistic regression really identifies, and if you have any ideas for how you might change
the analysis or do something differently.
If you were doing this code challenge, for example, as like a four month long research project.
Okay.
So now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I will discuss my solution and my thoughts.
Here I am grabbing the negation activations from the maximum beta neuron.
In fact, I already calculated this variable above.
But here it is again anyway.
Okay, and here I'm just a min max scaling this neurons activation so that we can use it as an index
into the colour map.
This code here you've seen before.
This is just identifying the width of a letter in Monospace.
And uh, yeah, there's not much I can show here that's new.
The main thing that's different that you haven't seen before is just this for loop here.
So instead of looping over all of the tokens in each batch, I'm just looping over from the preceding
five.
So this was 90.
We have the preceding context of 90.
And then we have the target token.
So now I'm just going to show a handful of tokens before instead of showing all of them.
That would just make a really long line.
And then I'm also just showing the first 20 batches in the sequence.
Okay.
So here we see what this looks like.
So this looks pretty nice.
What we are looking for here again is uh the words uh not and contractions.
So we do see that there are more active or relatively strong activations for not not not not neither
not this one also shows pretty similar level of activation for enough compared to neither and not pretty
interesting.
This one is also interesting because we see strong activations for the apostrophe t compared to the
couldn't uh without the apostrophe t.
Uh, yeah.
So overall, I think this looks fairly compelling, but we do also see very strong activations for tokens
that are not really related to negation, like rusty and dead at the end of corroded.
Although I suppose corroded does have kind of a negative connotation.
Out is not really a negation term, although again, you know, pass out maybe does have some negative
connotation.
So it looks like we do get some specificity for the tokens that we are looking for, but we also get
some activations for other tokens as well.
One thing to keep in mind is that we did not select for neurons that show strong activations to negation
words, and low activations to all the other tokens.
In fact, the analysis has nothing to do with the tokens like evidence and Commissioner, these tokens
never entered the analysis.
The logistic regression.
The logistic regression only had two sets of tokens the negation tokens and the affirmation tokens.
Now, I'm not plotting here all or any of the affirmation tokens.
If you would like, you can do that.
That could be interesting to look through the affirmation tokens for this same neuron, and maybe you
would want to print those out using blue color map instead of red color map.
Now for the final exercise.
In this code challenge, take the code that you wrote for exercise five and embed it in a for loop over
all the layers.
As you're going through each layer, there are several statistical quantities that you want to extract.
First is the percent of neurons that have a statistically significant beta coefficient.
So you'll need to get and store the p value from each test on each neuron.
And as I've discussed in previous videos, you should also use a corrected p value threshold by correcting
for the number of neurons in each layer.
You can do it simply through Bonferroni correction if you that is, dividing by the number of neurons.
That's what I do in my solution.
If you are more comfortable with statistics, you can also do something like FDR correction.
Next, you also want to calculate the prediction accuracy from all of the neurons.
And when you're finished your for loop you can generate two scatter plots that will look like this.
In both cases, the x axis is the layer or the transformer block.
And remember that zero is the first layer after the embeddings, and 36 is the final transformer block
before the embeddings.
And what I'm plotting over here on the left is the percent of significant logistic regressions in each
layer.
So this is the number of neurons that had a beta coefficient with a corresponding p value below the
significance threshold.
You can see from the y axis that this is going to range from around 25 to 70.
And the question is whether it's just kind of randomly scattered or whether the significance count goes
up or down, or maybe some other kind of nonlinear pattern as a function of the layer.
So this plot on the left is just about how many neurons have any beta coefficient that is statistically
significant.
And then over here on the right I have actually two scatter plots in the same axis.
Both of them show the prediction accuracy.
And there are red dots to show the results for all of the neurons.
So the prediction accuracy average over 5000 neurons in each layer.
And the green squares show only the neurons that had a significant positive beta coefficient.
So that means that this is averaging over the neurons if the beta coefficient was positive, and also
if the p value was less than the threshold.
And again, it will be interesting to see what kinds of patterns there are across the layers, if there
are any patterns at all.
Now here's a little tip.
When averaging the accuracies for only a subset of neurons where the beta values were positive and significant,
you can use the numpy function numpy dot dot where the ma here is for masked array.
I'm sure this is not the only way to do this selection, but I found this function pretty useful and
perhaps you will too.
Okay, so please now pause the video and enjoy wrapping up this code challenge.
And now I will show my solution and discuss my results.
A lot of the code here, at least in this first code cell, is code you've seen before Or in exercise
five.
Here I am initializing three matrices of p values, beta values and accuracies.
Average accuracies.
These two are initializing to be zeros and the p values I'm initializing to be ones.
And the reason for this is that if the logistic regression model doesn't work well, if it crashes,
uh, or yeah, it just doesn't give a good solution, then I actually want the p value to be initialized
as a one, so that I can ignore it in the selection procedure in the in the visualization after this
loop.
Right.
So here I'm looping over all of the layers in the model.
And then within each layer I loop over all of the neurons, grab their activations, build the model,
and all of this code you have seen before.
This code is new.
This line of code is kind of new.
I mean, you've seen this code before.
This just wasn't inside the loop over neurons.
So now I'm calculating the accuracy for each neuron.
This gets the accuracy for each neuron and each token.
And then I average those together.
This gives me a proportion with the mean.
And then I'm multiplying it by 100 just to scale up to percent.
This code takes several minutes.
And so I'm printing out just some update information here as it goes through each layer here in this
cell is where I do the visualization.
So here I'm creating masks to identify, uh, the beta values that have significant p values.
So that is here the p value mask.
Where are the p values less than 0.05 divided by the number of neurons.
So this is Bonferroni correcting within each layer.
It's an extremely strict p value threshold by the way because this is 5120.
So the p value needs to be really, really small.
The effect needs to be really significant for it to show up here.
And then here is for the positive betas.
That one's a little bit simpler.
Now I find this somewhat confusing that in this numpy function for masked array the mask actually gets
flipped.
So it masks out where something is true and it preserves where something is false.
I don't know what you think, but in my opinion, that is totally opposite of the way that I think about
masks.
So if you define the masks to be the thing that you're looking for, the qualities that you are looking
for in a matrix or vector, then you actually need to invert that mask in order for it to apply in such
a way that you actually get the values that you are looking for that fit into this mask.
Okay.
So that is that's for that.
And then here I'm plotting.
Here's the average of the p value.
Mask over axis one which is the layer axis.
I don't know sorry.
This is the neuron axis.
So we're averaging over all the neurons within each layer.
And that's how I get the average accuracy.
And then or the average number of neurons that showed a significant result.
And then I multiply that by 100.
Again that's just to scale up to percent.
And then over here I'm averaging accuracy and masked accuracy, which is just the accuracy where the
p value was significant and the beta value was positive.
So here is what that result looks like.
And we see in all of these cases the number or the percent of significant neurons that showed a significant,
uh, logistic regression decreased pretty steeply by a factor of two from 70 or even over two from almost
70%.
So in the early layers of this transformer, almost 70%, like two thirds of the neurons, showed a
significant difference in activation between negation and affirmation token words.
And then by the end, it drops down to less than a third, maybe a little bit over a quarter of the
neurons.
Now, that's still a pretty significant percentage.
That's around 1000 neurons out of 5000.
That still shows some kind of statistically significant difference in activation between the category
of negation words and the category of affirmation words, at least in this book.
But it is certainly quite a bit lower.
As for the prediction accuracy, we see that on average, so this is not the best performing neuron.
It's also not the worst performing neuron.
This is the average of all of the neurons and also all the significant positive neurons.
The prediction accuracy was fairly high, again going up to almost 80%, close to 75% in the early layers
and going down to 65% around two thirds prediction accuracy later on.
Now the chance level performance here would be 50%.
So numbers above around 50 or maybe a little bit over 50 are indicating some pretty decent predictability.
Now the reason why the all of the tests here, the red dots is lower.
That's pretty trivial because here I'm also including into the average these neurons where there was
significant prediction, and also neurons that were not statistically significant.
And so their prediction accuracy, we would expect to be somewhere around 50%.
So in fact, this is not really a terribly useful thing to show, but I think it's nice.
Anyway, just as a way to practice your coding skills and, uh, working with masked matrices.
Now, why is this the case?
I just want to say one quick word about interpreting this effect.
Remember that as these token embeddings vectors pass through the model, they go from one transformer
block to the next.
What's happening inside each transformer block?
As we get a little bit of a modification to the vector from the attention and from the MLP sublayers,
is that the model shifts from transforming the current token to making a prediction about the next token.
So in the beginning of the model, the transformer is really like thinking a lot about this token.
The token not and can't and isn't and shouldn't.
And the later you get into the model, the more the model is not processing that token in particular,
but thinking about what the next token should be based on this token and all the tokens that preceded
it.
Just as a meta comment here, we're not even finished the first mech Interp section, and I think you're
already starting to see that this kind of research is challenging for many reasons, including the complexity
of the models and the complexity of language human written language.
On the other hand, I actually enjoy that challenge, that difficulty, and I hope that you are also
enjoying it.
This complexity also means that it's difficult to blindly trust the outcome of any random statistical
analysis In terms of just looking at how many parameter estimates have a small p value, you really
need to check the results carefully to make sure that any interpretation you make is valid, correct,
and consistent with what the data are really showing.
And just to be clear, as long as you don't have any coding bugs, the statistics themselves are never
wrong.
Statistics is just math, and the math doesn't do things right or wrong.
But the way that someone uses a particular statistical analysis may not reveal exactly the results that
they are looking for.
And that is the tricky part.
Anyway, I'm sure that you put in a lot of work and effort into this code challenge, and the good news
is that all of that work will pay off in the next code challenge, where we will basically just adapt
this code to look at the attention sublayer.